Metals and alloys
    Structure and bonding in metals
        Metallic bonding
            Metals consist of giant structures of atoms arranged in a regular pattern.
            The electrons from the outer shells of the metal atoms are delocalised, and are free to move through the whole structure. 
            This sharing of delocalised electrons results in strong metallic bonding.
    Properties of metals
        The structure and bonding of metals explains their properties:

            they are electrical conductors because their delocalised electrons carry electrical charge through the metal
            they are good conductors of thermal energy because their delocalised electrons transfer energy
            they have high melting points and boiling points, because the metallic bonding in the giant structure of a metal is very strong - large amounts of energy are needed to overcomethe metallic bonds in melting and boiling

Alloys
    An alloy is a mixture of two or more elements, where at least one element is a metal. 
    Many alloys are mixtures of two or more metals.

    Many pure metals are too soft for many uses. 
    They can be made harder by adding another element to the pure metal, so forming an alloy. 
    This explains why an alloy often has more uses than the pure elements it is made from.

    Pure iron, for example, is very soft. Adding a small amount of tungsten to iron makes tool steel, which is harder than pure iron. Steels are examples of alloys. There are many types of steel.

        Steel	         Elements	         Properties
        Mild steel	     Carbon and iron	Easy to bend and pull into wires
        Tool steel	     Tungsten and iron	Hard, can be heated to high temperatures
        Stainless steel	 Chromium and iron	Hard, does not rust easily

    Explaining alloy hardness
        In the solid state, a pure metal has a giant metallic structure. 
        The atoms are arranged in layers. 
        When a force is applied, the layers may slide over each other. 
        The greater the force needed, the harder and stronger the metal.

        In a pure metal, the force needed to make the layers slide over each other is small. This explains why many pure metals are soft.

        In an alloy, there are atoms of different sizes. 
        The smaller or bigger atoms distort the layers of atoms in the pure metal. 
        This means that a greater force is required for the layers to slide over each other. 
        The alloy is harder and stronger than the pure metal.