Chemical cells
    Chemical cells use chemical reactions to transfer energy by electricity. 
    The voltage of a cell depends upon a number of factors, 
        including what the electrodes are made from, 
        and the substance used as the electrolyte.

    A simple cell can be made by connecting two different metals in contact with an electrolyte. 
    A number of cells can be connected in series to make a battery, which has a higher voltage than a single cell.

    In non-rechargeable cells, eg alkaline cells, a voltage is produced until one of the reactants is used up. 
    When this happens, we say the battery ‘goes flat’.

    In rechargeable cells and batteries, like the one used to power your mobile phone, the chemical reactions can be reversed when an external circuit is supplied.

    Here is a simple reactivity series: Au, Cu, Zn, Mg. reactivity increases from Au to Mg.

    If we connect different combinations of these metals to make a cell, we find that the voltage changes. In the below table, the positive electrodes and what they are made from are listed along the top and the negative electrodes along the side.

                 Magnesium -2.37	Zinc -0.76	    Copper +0.34
    Magnesium	0.00 V	            +1.61 V	        +2.71
    Zinc	    -1.61 V	            0.00 V	        +1.10 V
    Copper	    -2.71 V	            -1.10 V	        0.00 V


    Fuel cells

    Fuel cells work in a different way than chemical cells. Fuel cells produce a voltage continuously, as long as they are supplied with:
        a constant supply of a suitable fuel
        oxygen, eg from the air

    The fuel is oxidised electrochemically, rather than being burned, so the reaction takes place at a lower temperature than if it wasto be burned. 
    Energy is released as electrical energy, not thermal energy (heat).

    Hydrogen-oxygen fuel cells
        Hydrogen-oxygen fuel cells are an alternative to rechargeable cells and batteries. 
        In a hydrogen-oxygen fuel cell, hydrogen and oxygen are used to produce a voltage. 
        Water is the only product. 
        
        The overall reaction in a hydrogen-oxygen fuel cell is:
            hydrogen + oxygen → water
            2H2(g) + O2(g) → 2H2O(l)

        Electrode half equations - Higher
            At the negative electrode: 2H2 + 4OH- → 4H2O + 4e-
            At the positive electrode: O2 + 2H2O + 4e- → 4OH-

        When you add these two half equations together, you get the following overall equation:

            2H2 + 4OH- + O2 + 2H2O + 4e- → 4H2O + 4e- + 4OH-

            The hydroxide ions, electrons and two H2O molecules will now cancel because they are on both sides, leaving the overall equation:

            2H2 + O2 → 2H2O
Evaluating different cells

    Type of cell
    Alkaline cell	
        Pros : Cheaper to manufacture	
        Cons : May end up in landfill sites once fully discharged; recyclable though it is expensive
    Rechargeable cell	
        Pros : Can be recharged many times before being recycled, reducing the use of resources
        Cons : 	Costs more to manufacture
    Hydrogen fuel cell	
        Pros : Easy to maintain as there are no moving parts; small size; water is the only chemical product	
        Cons : Very expensive to manufacture; need a constant supply of hydrogen fuel, which is a flammable gas

    Fuel cells have different strengths and weaknesses, depending on the intended use. For example, fuel cells are used in spacecraft and vehicles.

    Fuel cells in spacecraft
        Hydrogen-oxygen fuel cells are used in spacecraft. In addition to the strengths in the table above, the water they produce is useful as drinking water for astronauts.

    Hydrogen-oxygen fuel cells must be supplied with hydrogen fuel and oxygen. This could be a problem once a spacecraft leaves the Earth. However, spacecraft in orbit, such as the International Space Station, have 
    solar cells. These convert light into electricity, so the hydrogen and oxygen can be replaced by the 
    electrolysis of water.

    Solar cells only work when they are in the light, so the fuel cells allow electricity to be produced even when the spacecraft is in the dark.