5.Questions

Multiple choice questions
    What is the part of the animal cell that is labelled by A?
    Which of these units is most suitable for measuring the length of a cell?
    A cell of the pancreas produces digestive enzymes, which are proteins. The enzymes are released into the small intestine.
        Suggest which two of the following are adaptations to its role?
    By which two processes does glucose enter cells in the human body?

One- and two-mark questions
The number of marks per question part is given in this form [2 marks]. It is essential that you give two different answers if a question is worth two marks. Sometimes you can gain a second mark by giving the units in a calculation or stating specific data points,

    Use one word from the box to complete the sentence.
    The structure in a cell that controls the cell's activities is called the _________

    Give two differences between plant and animal cells.

    Name the type of cell in plants that can differentiate into different types of cell.
    You need to be precise not "stemcells". Meristem cell or meristematic cell.

Three- and four-mark questions

    Describe the process of cloning and how it can help to prevent plant species from becoming extinct.
    Describe how a sperm cell is adapted to its role.
    Describe the similarities and differences between the processes of diffusion and osmosis.
    Compare the advantages and disadvantages of light and electron microscopes.

    Describe the process of cloning and how it can help to prevent plant species from becoming extinct.
        cells removed from the meristem of plant (that is being protected from extinction)
        culture the cells in sterile cell/tissue culture medium
        plantlets produced are transferred to pots
        more individuals of the plant species are produced without the plants having to reproduce sexually (which takes time or there may not be another individual available)
    Describe how a sperm cell is adapted to its role.
        role is to fertilise an egg
        the head has the nucleus, which contains the male genetic material
        it has a tail for swimming
        the acrosome has enzymes so that the sperm can penetrate the egg
        it is packed with mitochondria to supply the energy for movement
    Describe the similarities and differences between the processes of diffusion and osmosis.
        all gases and liquids move by diffusion
        only water moves by osmosis
        molecules move from high to low concentration in both processes
        this means molecules move down a concentration gradient
        osmosis must occur across a partially permeable membrane
        neither process requires energy
    Compare the advantages and disadvantages of light and electron microscopes.
        electron microscopes have higher magnification
        electron microscopes have higher resolution
        scanning electron microscopes can be used to examine the surface structure of cells/structures
        light microscopes can be used to examine living cells, electron microscopes cannot

Maths questions
    A student observed a cell with a microscope. The magnification of the eyepiece was x10. The magnification of the objective was x20.
    What magnification was the student using?

    The student measured a cell they were looking at as 0.5 mm.
    Convert this into micrometres.

    A student measured the change in mass of potato cylinders placed in different concentrations of salt solution. Their results are shown below.


    The diameter of a red blood cell is 7 μm.
    The diameter of one species of Amoeba is 0.7 mm.
    Calculate the difference in order of magnitude between the two.

    (a) A student is calibrating an eyepiece graticule.
        The student finds that 45 divisions on the eyepiece graticule correspond with 100 μm on the stage micrometer.
        Calculate what one division of the eyepiece graticule at this magnification represents. Write your answer to two significant figures.

    (b) The student then finds that the length of a protist they are examining measures 42 divisions on the eyepiece graticule.


Practical questions
    You will complete twenty-one required practical activities if you are studying GCSE combined science: Trilogy. You could be asked questions about the apparatus, methods, safety precautions, results, analysis and evaluation of these experiments.

    In this Cell Biology section there are two required practical activities:

    Required Practical Activity 1: Use a light microscope to observe, draw and label a selection of plant and animal cells. A magnification scale must be included.
    Required Practical Activity 3: Investigate the effect of a range of concentrations of salt or sugar solution on the mass of plant tissue.

    A student is investigating the process of mitosis with a microscope.
    The hazard warning label on the chromosome stain they use states:
        may cause skin irritation
        may cause eye irritation
        may be harmful if swallowed
        non-flammable
    Suggest three safety precautions they should take.

    Describe how to prepare a stained slide of onion epidermal tissue.
        (a) A student investigated the effects of osmosis in potato tissue by placing potato cylinders in different concentrations of sugar solution.
        Their results are shown below (as a percentage).
        Identify the anomalous result. [1 mark]

    (b) Calculate the mean change in mass for each concentration. Do not include the anomalous result from Experiment 6 in your calculations.
    Give your answer to one decimal place. [2 marks]

    (c) Explain why the student expressed change in mass as a percentage. [3 marks]

    Describe how you would set up a microscope to examine a prepared slide under high power. [6 marks]

Six-mark questions
Six-mark questions are often the questions that people find the most difficult. 
In all longer answer questions, but especially the six-mark ones, it is important that you plan your answer and not just rush into it. 
After all, you would plan an essay or short story before starting. 
Without a plan it is easy to stray away from the key point and lose marks, get steps in a process in the wrong order or forget key bits of information. 
Remember to write your answer in full sentences, not bullet points.

    Explain why a plant will wilt if not watered. [6 marks]
    Describe the process of therapeutic cloning. [6 marks]
    Discuss the arguments for and against stem cell research. [6 marks]
    Compare the structure of prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms. [6 marks]

    Explain why a plant will wilt if not watered. [6 marks]
        The following is a list of valid points that could be included in your answer. In your answer, it is important that you do not bullet point them, but link your ideas together:

        water enters plant cells by osmosis
        when a plant is well-watered, the cells are turgid
        when a plant isn’t watered, it will lose water, as water will diffuse from the cells
        as water concentration is now lower outside the cell
        cells will lose their turgidity/become plasmolysed
        the cell contents are no longer pushing against the cell wall – the cells will become flaccid and the plant will wilt
    Describe the process of therapeutic cloning. [6 marks]
        The following is a list of valid points that could be included in your answer. Remember that it is important that you do not bullet point them, but link your ideas together:

        a body cell is removed from a patient and an egg cell is taken from a donor
        the nucleus is removed from the (donor) egg cell and discarded
        the nucleus is taken from the patient’s cell
        the nucleus is transferred to the donor cell
        the resulting embryo is stimulated to divide
        the embryo is cultured for 4-5 days
        stem cells can then be removed and cultured
    Discuss the arguments for and against stem cell research. [6 marks]
        The following is a list of valid points that could be included in your answer.

        research on stem cells could lead to therapies to treat conditions such as diabetes and paralysis
        research could be used to increase our understanding of cell development/ differentiation
        stem cells could be used to test new drugs
        adult stem cells are rare in the human body and few in numbers
        they do not differentiate in many different cell types, so can only be used to treat certain conditions
        embryonic stem cells have the potential to differentiate into a greater number of cell types
        the use of embryonic stem cells involves destruction of an embryo
        people object to the use of embryos for stem cell research for ethical, social and religious reasons
        stem cell therapy, so far, has had limited success
        stem cell therapy may lead to viral infections
    Compare the structure of prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms. [6 marks]
        The following is a list of valid points that could be included in your answer.
        Note that questions with ‘Compare...’ in them will look for similarities as well as differences.

        they are both bounded by a cell membrane
        they both have ribosomes (though they are different sizes)
        prokaryotic organisms have a cell wall. Cell walls are also found in the eukaryotic organisms, plants and fungi
        prokaryotic organisms are much smaller in size than eukaryotic organisms
        the genetic material of prokaryotic cells is a single loop of DNA that lies in the cytoplasm - in eukaryotic organisms, it is in the nucleus
        prokaryotic cells have additional DNA - DNA in a ring called a plasmid (plasmids are very rarely found in eukaryotic organisms)

Linking questions
Linking questions span different topics.

One way to answer linking questions is to follow these steps:

identify exactly what the question is asking (perhaps by underlining key parts)
identify what the link between the two parts of the question is
make a short plan of these links (which will form the basis of your answer)
include as much information as you can to obtain full marks (see below)

    In the future, how might stem cells be used to treat a patient with type 1 diabetes? [3 marks]
    This question combines ideas about diabetes with stem cells and potential stem cell therapies.
    When answering questions on stem cells, be careful, as therapies are being developed, rather than being used.
        Answer:
        type 1 diabetes occurs when a person cannot produce any, or enough insulin
        in the future, stem cells from a donor or family member could be transplanted
        so that the patient can produce insulin
    
    Describe an experiment to demonstrate the effect of different concentrations of salt on beetroot cells. [6 marks]

        This question combines ideas about osmosis and techniques used in microscopy.
        While you could write about an experiment on osmosis in beetroot cylinders it's better to write about the examination of the beetroot cells.
        Marking points:

        prepare a range of concentrations of salt solution on a microscope slide
        cut a thin slice of beetroot tissue and place it on the slide
        place a coverslip on top
        examine with low power, then high power to observe individual cells
        observe/draw/record digitally what you see, but look at other areas of the slide to make sure that these observations are consistent
        repeat with other concentrations of salt solution

    Explain how plants meet the challenges of growing in hot, dry climates. [6 marks]

        This question combines ideas about photosynthesis, diffusion, transpiration and surface area to volume ratios.

        The following is a list of valid points that could be included in your answer.

        when plants open stomata to let in the carbon dioxide required for photosynthesis, water diffuses out - a process called transpiration
        in hot, dry climates, the rate of transpiration will be higher
        these plants have adaptations to reduce water loss
        leaves are reduced in size and may be reduced to spines
        stomata may be sunken in pits, surrounded by hairs or in furrows in the stem
        wwater will be lost over the plants’ surface and the shape of the plant, eg globular, reduces the surface area to volume ratio and therefore the amount of water lost

    There are two types of cell division in eukaryotes.
    Explain the importance of mitosis in the growth and repair of an organism but meiosis in the production of gametes. [6 marks]

        This question combines ideas about mitosis, meiosis, genetic variation and evolution.

        Note that it is not just a standard, compare the difference between mitosis and meiosis, type question. It has particular focus.

        The following is a list of valid points that could be included in your answer:

        mitosis takes place where it is essential that the daughter cells produced are identical to the parent cells
        daughter cells must have the same alleles so that genes can be expressed appropriately
        the production of identical daughter cells is important in growth, from the embryo, to the foetus, to the mature organism - and in the repair and replacement of damaged and worn out cells
        meiosis is a reduction division that produces daughter cells with half the number of chromosomes as the parent cells
        this is necessary because otherwise, a gamete would contain the same number of chromosomes as a parent (if they were produced by mitosis), and an organism’s chromosome number would double every generation
        during meiosis, there is also an exchange of genetic material between chromosomes as their pair up. This leads to genetic variation in the offspring
        the genetic variation from sexual reproduction contributes to the survival of a species.
        when DNA is copied, in both types of cell division, mistakes are made – mutations occur. In the case of meiosis, this is the driving force of evolution