Transformers - Higher 

    Transformers
        A transformer is a device that can change the potential difference or voltage of an alternating current:
            a step-up transformer increases the voltage
            a step-down transformer reduces the voltage

            potential difference : The potential difference (or voltage) of a supply is a measure of the energy given to the charge carriers in a circuit. Units = volts (V). This is the voltage between two points that makes an electric current flow between them.

        When a transformer is working:
            a primary voltage drives an alternating current through the primary coil
            the primary coil current produces a magnetic field, which changes as the current changes
            the iron core increases the strength of the magnetic field
            the changing magnetic field induces a changing potential difference in the secondary coil
            the induced potential difference produces an alternating current in the external circuit

        Transformers can only work with alternating current.

        Potential difference
            The ratio of potential differences on the transformer coils matches the ratio of the numbers of turns on the coils.

            This equation can be used to calculate what the output might be from a particular transformer, or to work out how to design a transformer to make a particular voltage change:

            Vp / Vs = np / ns
                This is when:

                Vp is the potential difference in the primary (input) coil in volts (V)
                Vs is the potential difference in the secondary (output) coil in volts (V)
                np is the number of turns on the primary coil
                ns is the number of turn on the secondary coil

            In a step-up transformer, Vs > Vp, and ns > np
            In a step-down transformer, Vs < Vp and ns < np

            A mains (230 volt) transformer has 11,500 turns on its primary coil and 600 turns on its secondary coil. Calculate the voltage obtained from the secondary coil.

            Vs =  230 * 600 /11500 = 12 volt

        Electrical power
            To calculate electrical power, use the equation:

            power = potential difference × current
            p =  V I
                power (P) is measured in watts (W)
                potential difference (V) is measured in volts (V)
                current (I) is measured in amperes - also referred to as amps (A)

            Assuming that a transformer is 100 per cent efficient, the following equation can be used to calculate the power output from the transformer:

            Vs * Is = Vp * Ip

            A step-down transformer converts 11,500 V into 230 V. The power output is used to run a 2,000 W kettle. Calculate the current flowing in the primary coil.

            Secondary Power = Vs * Is = 2000
            Primary Power = Vp * Ip = 2000
            Ip = 2000/11500 = 0.174A

    Power transmission
        The National Grid carries electricity around Britain. The higher the current in a cable, the greater the energy transferred to the surroundings by heating. This means that high currents waste more energy than low currents.

        To reduce energy transfers to the environment, the National Grid uses step-up transformers to increase the voltage from power stations to thousands of volts, which lowers the current in the transmission cables. Step-down transformers are then used to decrease the voltage from the transmission cables, so it is safer to distribute to homes and factories.

        