Questions
    https://www.bbc.co.uk/bitesize/guides/zgwf4qt/revision/6
    
    Multiple choice questions
        How is carbohydrate stored in plants? starch
        Which of the following are true of gas exchange in plants? 
        Which one of the following molecules is the storage form of carbohydrate in humans? glycogen
        Which two of the following would increase the rate of photosynthesis? 
    One and two mark questions
        Pollen grains grow down into female flowers on their way to fertilising an egg. In the flower tissue, oxygen concentrations are low.
        Suggest which molecules are produced as a pollen grain respires. 

        Describe how anaerobic respiration is important in bread making.
        Define the inverse square law.
            For a type of electromagnetic radiation such as light [1 mark]As the distance from the light source increases, light intensity is inversely proportional to the square of the distance
        Explain how some plants are adapted to growing in the shade.
            Shade-adapted plants produce more chlorophyll (so that they are more efficient at absorbing light) [1] 
            So can photosynthesise at lower light intensities/have a lower compensation point than plants that grow in brighter conditions [1]
    Three and four mark questions
        Complete the following table comparing aerobic and anaerobic respiration.
        In an experiment investigating the effect of light intensity on photosynthesis in a pondweed, explain how a student kept the carbon dioxide constant at the beginning of the experiment
        In a wood where bluebells live around the base of the trees, suggest what factors limit the rate of the bluebells' photosynthesis in the spring, and then in midsummer.
        The graph shows some data from Long et al (2004) on how elevated carbon dioxide concentration affects production of glucose and starch in a plant. Describe and explain the effects of elevated carbon dioxide concentration on glucose and starch in the plant

    Six-mark questions
        Describe how the products of photosynthesis are used by a plant.
        The graph shows the concentration of lactic acid in an athlete's blood before, during and after a training session.
        Describe and explain the changes in the athlete's blood.
        Discuss how a commercial plant grower, with locations in the UK and across Europe, could increase yields in greenhouse and field crops.



        Describe how the products of photosynthesis are used by a plant.
            glucose is the product of photosynthesis
            some glucose is used for respiration by the plant's cells
            starch is built up and stored in the plant's cells, including those of storage organs
            starch can be broken down and the glucose used when it is needed, eg for respiration during the germination of seeds
            some glucose is converted into cellulose, used to construct cell walls
            glucose is converted into amino acids, with the help of nitrates absorbed from the soil
            amino acids built into proteins
            glucose is converted into lipids, eg used as an energy store in seeds

        Discuss how a commercial plant grower, with locations in the UK and across Europe, could increase yields in greenhouse and field crops.
            Increased yields are dependent on rate of photosynthesis and reducing losses, eg by pests.

            Greenhouse crops:

            irrigate with optimum amount of water
            increase greenhouse temperature using heating system
            increase light intensity
            increase carbon dioxide concentrations by piping in carbon dioxide gas
            add fertiliser or use a hydroponics system
            increase yields using appropriate pesticides or other control methods
            Field crops:

            select a location across Europe optimum for the growth of the crop, eg for sunlight and rainfall
            use an irrigation system to provide the optimum amount of water
            could not increase external carbon dioxide concentration (unless the plants were grown in polythene/plastic tunnels)
            add fertilisers
            reduce losses from pests using pesticides and/or growing genetically modified (GM) crops
