Transverse and longitudinal waves - AQA

    longitudinal waves
        In longitudinal waves, the vibrations are parallel to the direction of wave travel.
            sound waves
            ultrasound waves
            seismic P-waves
        These are pressure or push waves as the particles move parallel to the wave.
        Longitudinal waves show areas of compression and rarefaction:compressions are regions of high pressure due to particles being close together, rarefactions are regions of low pressure due to particles being spread further apart

    Transverse waves
        In transverse waves, the vibrations are at right angles to the direction of wave travel.
            ripples on the surface of water
            vibrations in a guitar string
            a Mexican wave in a sports stadium
            electromagnetic waves - eg light waves, microwaves, radio waves
            seismic S-waves

    Electromagnetic waves
    Electromagnetic waves are transverse waves. 
    Their vibrations or oscillations are changes in electrical and magnetic fields at right angles to the direction of wave travel.

    All electromagnetic waves:
        transfer energy as radiation from the source of the waves to an absorber
        can travel through a vacuum such as in space
        travel at the same speed through a vacuum or the air

    Electromagnetic waves travel at 300 million metres per second (m/s) through a vacuum.

    Electromagnetic waves form a continuous spectrum of waves. This includes:
        waves with a very short wavelength, high frequency and high energy
        waves with a very long wavelength, low frequency and low energy

        long wave length, low frequency, low energy > radio waves, microwaves, infrared, visible light, ultra violet, x ray, gamma ray > short wavelength, high frequency high energy

        red light has the lowest frequencies of visible light
        violet light has the highest frequencies of visible light
    
        Radio waves, microwaves, infrared and visible light
            Radio waves are transmitted easily through air. 
            They do not cause damage if absorbed by the human body, and they can be reflected to change their direction. 
            These properties make them ideal for communications, such as television and radio.
        Radio wave
            Radio waves can be produced by oscillations in electrical circuits. 
            When radio waves are absorbed by a conductor, they create an alternating current. 
            This electrical current has the same frequency as the radio waves. 
            Information is coded into the wave before transmission, which can then be decoded when the wave is received. Television and radio systems use this principle to broadcast information.
        Microwaves 
            High frequency microwaves have frequencies which are easily absorbed by molecules in food. 
            The internal energy of the molecules increases when they absorb microwaves, which causes heating. 
            Microwaves pass easily through the atmosphere, so they can pass between stations on Earth and satellites in orbit.

        Infrared
            Infrared light is used by electrical heaters, cookers for cooking food, and by infrared cameras which detect people in the dark.
            Infrared light has frequencies which are absorbed by some chemical bonds. 
            The internal energy of the bonds increases when they absorb infrared light, which causes heating. 
            This makes infrared light useful for electrical heaters and for cooking food. 
            All objects emit infrared light. 
            The human eye cannot see this light but infrared cameras can detect it. This 'thermal imaging' is useful for detecting people in the dark.

        Visible light
            Visible light is the light we can see. It is used in fibre optic communications, where coded pulses of light travel through glass fibres from a source to a receiver.

    Ultraviolet, EM waves in medicine and ionising radiation
        Ultraviolet
            We cannot see ultraviolet light but it can have hazardous effects on the human body. U
            ltraviolet light in sunlight can cause the skin to tan or burn. 
            Fluorescent substances are used in energy-efficient lamps - they absorb ultraviolet light produced inside the lamp, and re-emit the energy as visible light.
        Electromagnetic waves in medicine
            Changes in atoms and their nuclei can cause electromagnetic waves to be generated or absorbed. 
            Gamma rays are produced by changes in the nucleus of an atom. 
            They are a form of nuclear radiation. 
            High energy waves such as X-rays and gamma rays are transmitted through body tissues with very little absorption. 
            This makes them ideal for internal imaging. X-rays are absorbed by dense structures like bones, which is why X-ray photos are used to help identify broken bones.
        Ionising radiation
            Ultraviolet waves, X-rays and gamma rays are types of ionising radiation. They can add or remove electrons from molecules, producing electrically charged ions. Ionisation can have hazardouseffects on the body:

            ultraviolet waves can cause skin to age prematurely and increase the risk of skin cancer x-rays and gamma rays can cause the mutation of genes, which can lead to cancer

        Radiation dose
            Radiation dose is a measure of the risk of harm caused by exposing the body to ionising radiation. 
            Radiation dose is measured in Sieverts (Sv). As radiation dose figures are generally small, they are usually given in millisieverts (mSv):

            1000 mSv = 1 Sv
            Background radiation is all around us, all the time. Sources include:
                radioactive rocks in the Earth's crust
                cosmic rays from space
                man-made sources such as nuclear weapons fallout and nuclear accidents
                The level of background radiation and dose are affected by factors such as the jobs that people do and the places where people live.