Reflection and refraction
    Reflection of waves
        Waves - including sound and light - can be reflected at the boundary between two different materials. The reflection of sound causes echoes.
        The law of reflection states that: angle of incidence = angle of reflection
        The angles of incidence and reflection are measured between the light ray and the normal - an imaginary line at 90° to the surface.

        Specular reflection
            Reflection from a smooth, flat surface is called specular reflection. This is the type of reflection that happens with a flat mirror. The image in a mirror is:
                upright
                virtual

            In a virtual image, the rays appear to diverge from behind the mirror, so the image appears to come from behind the mirror.

        Diffuse reflection
            If a surface is rough, diffuse reflection happens. Instead of forming an image, the reflected light is scattered in all directions. This may cause a distorted image of the object, as occurs with rippling water, or no image at all. 
            Each individual reflection still obeys the law of reflection, but the different parts of the rough surface are at different angles.

    Reflection and refraction
        Different materials have different densities. Light waves may change direction at the boundary between two transparent materials. Refraction is the change in direction of a wave at such a boundary.

        Refraction can cause optical illusions as the light waves appear to come from a different position to their actual source.

        Explaining refraction - Higher
            The density of a material affects the speed that a wave will be transmitted through it. In general, the denser the transparent material, the more slowly light travels through it

            Glass is denser than air, so a light ray passing from air into glass slows down. If the ray meets the boundary at an angle to the normal, it bends towards the normal.

            The reverse is also true. A light ray speeds up as it passes from glass into air, and bends away from the normal by the same angle.

            A useful way of remembering the speed and direction changes of light during refraction is ‘FAST’: Faster - Away / Slower - Towards.

        Wave speed, frequency and wavelength in refraction
            wave speed = frequency × wavelength
            For a given frequency of light, the wavelength is proportional to the wave speed
            So if a wave slows down, its wavelength will decrease. 
            Although the wave slows down, its frequency remains the same, due to the fact that its wavelength is shorter.