Lenses 
    A lens is a shaped piece of transparent glass or plastic that refracts light.

    A lens can be convex or concave.
    Convex lenses
        A convex lens is thicker in the middle than it is at the edges. 
        Parallel light rays that enter the lens converge. 
        They come together at a point called the principal focus.
        In a ray diagram, a convex lens is drawn as a vertical line with outward facing arrows to indicate the shape of the lens. 
        The distance from the lens to the principal focus is called the focal length.

    Concave lenses
        A concave lens is thinner in the middle than it is at the edges. This causes parallel rays to diverge. They separate but appear to come from a principle focus on the other side of the lens.

        In a ray diagram, a concave lens is drawn as a vertical line with inward facing arrows to indicate the shape of the lens.

    Real and virtual images
        The images formed by a lens can be:

        upright or inverted (upside down compared to the object)
        magnified or diminished (smaller than the object)
        real or virtual
        
        A real image is an image that can be projected onto a screen. A virtual image appears to come from behind the lens.

        To draw a ray diagram:
            Draw a ray from the object to the lens that is parallel to the principal axis. Once through the lens, the ray should pass through the principal focus.
            Draw a ray which passes from the object through the centre of the lens.

    Convex lenses
        The type of image formed by a convex lens depends on the lens used and the distance from the object to the lens.

        A camera or human eye
            Cameras and eyes contain convex lenses. For a distant object that is placed more than twice the focal length from the lens, the image is:
                inverted
                diminished
                real

        Projectors
            Projectors contain convex lenses. For an object placed between one and two focal lengths from the lens, the image is:
                inverted
                magnified
                real

        Magnifying glasses
            A magnifying glass is a convex lens used to make an object appear much larger than it actually is. This works when the object is placed at a distance less than the focal length. The image is:
                upright
                magnified
                virtual
        Only the person using the magnifying glass can see the image. 
        The image cannot be projected onto a screen because it is a virtual image.

        Concave lenses
            Concave lenses always produce images that are:

            upright
            diminished
            virtual
        
            Peep hole lenses
                Peep holes are set into doors so the occupant can identify a visitor before opening the door.

                For an object viewed through a concave lens, light rays from the top of the object will be refracted and will diverge on the other side of the lens. These rays will appear:
                    from the same side of the principal axis meaning the image will be upright
                    further from the principal axis, so the image will be smaller than the object

Magnification
    Magnification is a measure of the size of an image compared to the size of the object. Lenses and curved mirrors can produce magnified images.

    Magnification  = image height / object height`

Colour
    Within the visible light range of the electromagnetic spectrum there is a spectrum of colour.   
    This is a continuous range of colours. In order of increasing frequency and decreasing wavelength these are given as: ROYGBIV

    Absorption of light
        Waves can be absorbed at the boundary between two different materials. When waves are absorbed by a surface, the energy of the wave is transferred to the particles in the surface.

        For example, grass appears green in white light:red, orange, yellow, blue, indigo and violet are absorbed by the grass, green light is reflected by the grass and detected by our eyes

        Transmission of light
            Waves can also be transmitted at the boundary between two different materials. 
            When waves are transmitted, the wave continues through the material. 
            Air, glass and water are common materials that are very good at transmitting light

        Translucent materials transmit some light but are not completely clear. Lamp shades, shower curtains and window blinds are often translucent objects.

        Coloured objects in coloured light
            An object appears to be black if it absorbs all the wavelengths of visible light. For example, an object that appears blue in white light will appear black in red light. 
            This is because the red light contains no blue light for the object to reflect.