Atoms, elements and compounds
    https://www.bbc.co.uk/bitesize/guides/zg2h4qt/revision/1
Chemical symbols

    All substances are made from tiny particles called atoms. An atom is the smallest part of an element that can exist.

    Atoms of each element are represented by their own chemical symbol. 
    one or two letter and starts with capital
    There are 118 different elements. 
    Elements are arranged into groups with similar properties. Groups are numbered from 1 to 7, then 0. 
    metals are on the left of the stepped line, and non-metals are on the right.


Chemical formulae of elements
    A chemical formula is used to represent an element or compound in balanced chemical equations. e.g helium, He
    The formula for most elements is just its chemical symbol.
    Some non-metal elements exist as molecules that are made up of two atoms joined together.
    I Bring Clay For Our New House. I2, Br2, Cl2, F2, O2, N2, H2

Chemical formulae of compounds
    A compound is a substance that contains two or more elements that are chemically combined. The elements in a compound are present in fixed proportions.

    Sodium chloride	    NaCl
    Potassium bromide	KBr
    Magnesium iodide	MgI2
    Carbon dioxide	    CO2
    Carbon monoxide	    CO
    Sulfur trioxide	    SO3
    Water	            H2O
    Ammonia	            NH3
    Methane	            CH4
    HydrogenSulfide     H2S : Poison gas in fart

    In compounds made up of non-metal elements only, the second word of the compound's name starts with mon-, di-, or tri-, eg carbon dioxide. This shows the number of atoms of this element for every one atom of the first element in the name.
    
    Many compounds exist naturally. 
    It is not easy to split up a compound into its elements - the only way to do this is in chemical reactions.

Chemical formulae of ions
    An ion is a charged particle formed when an atom, or a group of atoms, loses or gains electrons. 
    The number and sign of its electrical charges are shown in superscript text.

    Sodium Ion ; Na+
    Magnesium : Mg2+ (Two positive)
    Chloride : cl-
    Oxide : O2-

    The numbers of ions in a formula must give an equal number of positive and negative charges. 
        Magnesium chloride	MgCl2
        Sodium oxide	Na2O
        Magnesium oxide	MgO
Word equations
    A word equation represents a chemical reaction using the names of the substances involved. Word equations do not show any chemical symbols or formulae.
    Word equations always take this form: reactants → products
        A + sign separates two or more reactants, or two or more products.

    There can be different numbers of reactants and products. For example:
        sodium + chlorine → sodium chloride
        calcium carbonate → calcium oxide + carbon dioxide
        nitrogen + hydrogen → ammonia

Balanced chemical equations
    A balanced chemical equation represents a chemical reaction using the formulae of the reactants and products. It shows the number of units of each substance involved.

    State symbols
        Balanced chemical equations sometimes include state symbols in brackets after each formula. They show the physical state of that substance.
        H2O(l) is liquid water but H2O(g) is steam and H2O(s) is ice. (aq)	is used for Aqueous solution state symbol
    
    Balancing an equation
    The law of conservation of mass states that no atoms are lost or made during a chemical reaction, so the total mass of the products is equal to the total mass of the reactants.

    N2 + H2 → NH3 After balancing N2 + 3H2 → 2NH3
    Add the state symbols if asked to do so.	N2(g) + 3H2(g) → 2NH3(g)