2.Mixtures

    Pure substances and mixtures
        a pure substance consists only of one element or one compound
        a mixture consists of two or more different substances, not chemically joined together
    The substances in a mixture can be elements, or compounds, or both. Being part of a mixture does not change the chemical properties of the substances that are in it

    Separating mixtures
        Mixtures can be separated by physical processes. These processes do not involve chemical reactions, and no new substances are made.

        Filtration and crystallisation
            Filtration : Filtratio is used to separate aninsolubl solid from a liquid.
        Crystallisation is used to produce solid crystals from a solution. When the solution is warmed, some of solvent evaporates leaving crystals behind. 
            To obtain large, regularly shaped crystals from crystallisation:
                put the solution in an evaporating basin
                warm the solution by placing the evaporating basin over a boiling water bath
                stop heating when crystals begin to form around the edge of the basin
                After the remaining solution has cooled down, pour the excess liquid away (or filter it). Dry the crystals using a warm oven or by patting them with filter paper.

        Distillation
            Simple distillation is used to separate a solvent from a solution. It is useful for producing pure water from seawater.
            Simple distillation works because the dissolved solute has a much higher boiling point than the solvent. 
            When the solution is heated, solvent vapour leaves the solution. 
            It moves away and is cooled and condensed. The remaining solution becomes more concentrated as the amount of solvent in it decreases.

        Paper chromatography
            Paper chromatography is used to separate mixtures of soluble substances. These are often coloured substances such as food colourings, inks, dyes or plant pigments.
            Phases
            Chromatography relies on two different ‘phases’:
                the stationary phase, which in paper chromatography is very uniform, absorbent paper
                the mobile phase is the solvent that moves through the paper, carrying different substances with it
                The different dissolved substances in a mixture are attracted to the two phases in different proportions. This causes them to move at different rates through the paper.