Groups in the periodic table

Group 0 - physical properties

    Group 0 contains non-metal elements placed in the vertical column on the far right of the periodic table. The elements in group 0 are called the noble gases. They exist as single atoms.

    He, Ne, Ar, Kr, Xe, Rn, Og

    The noble gases all have low boiling points:
    helium, at the top of group 0, has the lowest boiling point of any element
    the attractive forces between the atoms become stronger.
    This is because, going down group 0: the atoms become larger
    the intermolecular forces between the atoms become stronger more energy is needed to overcome these forces

Group 0 - chemical properties
    Compared to other elements, the noble gases are inert - they are extremely unreactive and do not take part in chemical reactions.

    All the noble gases have complete outer shells:
    Atoms of group 0 elements already have stable arrangements of electrons
    This means that they have no tendency to lose, gain, or share electrons.

Group 1 - physical properties

    li, Na, K, Rb, Cs, Fr

    The elements in group 1 are called the alkali metals

    The alkali metals share similar physical properties. For example, they:
    are soft (they can be cut with a knife)
    have relatively low melting points
    have low densities

    Going down group 1, the melting point decreases.
    Atomic radius increases, weakening the metallic bonds. 
    This is due to the increasing number of electron shells, which leads to greater distance and less attraction between the nucleus and the outer, delocalized electrons. 


Group 1 - chemical reactions with water
    The alkali metals react with water to produce a metal hydroxide and hydrogen. For example, sodium reacts with water:
    sodium + water → sodium hydroxide + hydrogen
    2Na(s) + 2H2O(l) → 2NaOH(aq) + H2(g)

    Sodium hydroxide is an alkali. It is a base that dissolves in water to form an alkaline solution. This solution: has a pH greater than 7turns universal indicator solution blue or purple

    potassium + water → potassium hydroxide + hydrogen
    2K(s) + 2H2O(l) → 2KOH(aq) + H2(g)

    The table shows observations when lithium, sodium and potassium are added to water. 
    Notice that the reactivity of these metals increases going down the group. 
    This pattern is seen with all reactions of group 1 elements. 
    For example, the reaction of caesium with chlorine is more vigorous than the reaction of potassium with chlorine.

    Element	                  Observation when added to water
    Lithium, Li	              Fizzes steadily; slowly becomes smaller until it disappears
    Sodium, Na	              Fizzes rapidly; melts to form a ball; quickly becomes smaller until it disappears
    Potassium, K	          Burns violently with sparks and a lilac flame; quickly melts to form a ball; disappears rapidly, often with a small explosion

Group 1 - chemical reactions with oxygen and chlorine
    The group 1 elements react with oxygen from the air to make metal oxides.
    At room temperature, oxygen reacts with the surface of the metal. This forms a white oxide, which covers the surface. The metal below the surface does not react.
    The alkali metals burn vigorously when heated and placed in a gas jar of oxygen. The oxide forms as white smoke.
    sodium + oxygen → sodium oxide
    4Na(s) + O2(g) → 2Na2O(s)

    The reactivity of the group 1 elements increases down the group, so their reactions with oxygen get more vigorous.

Reactions with chlorine
    The group 1 elements react vigorously with chlorine. The products of the reactions are chlorides. At room temperature the chlorides are white solids. They dissolve in water to form colourless solutions. For example:
    sodium + chlorine → sodium chloride
    2Na(s) + Cl2(g) → 2NaCl(s)
    The reactions with chlorine get more vigorous going down the group.

Explaining the trend in reactivity
    Going down group 1:

    the atoms become larger
    the outer electron becomes further from the nucleus
    the force of attraction between the nucleus and the outer electron decreases
    the outer electron is lost more easily

Group 7 - physical properties
    Group 7 contains non-metal elements placed in a vertical column on the right of the periodic table. The elements in group 7 are called the halogens.

    Physical properties
        The halogens exist as simple molecules. Each molecule is made up of a pair of halogen atoms joined by a single covalent bond. 
        In all groups of the periodic table, the further down the group an element is, the higher its relative molecular mass.
        covalent bond : A bond between atoms formed when atoms share electrons to achieve a full outer shell of electrons.

        At room temperature
            Element  	Colour	       State
        Chlorine, Cl2	Pale green	    Gas
        Bromine, Br2	Brown	        Liquid
        Iodine, I2	    Purple-black	Solid

        In group 7, the further down the group an element is, the higher its melting point and boiling point. This is because, going down group 7:
        the molecules become larger
        the intermolecular forces become strongermore energy is needed to overcome these forces

    Group 7 - chemical properties

        When a group 7 element takes part in a reaction, its atoms each gain one electron. 
        These atoms form negatively charged ions. The ions have a stable arrangement of electrons, with a complete outer shell.

        Reactions with metals
            The halogens react with metals to produce salts. The salts are made up of ions, which are held together by ionic bonds. For example, chlorine reacts with sodium:
                sodium + chlorine → sodium chloride
                2Na(s) + Cl2(g) → 2NaCl(s)

            Sodium and chlorine react vigorously when heated, giving an orange flame and clouds of white sodium chloride.
            In group 7, the reactivity of the elements decreases down the group.
        
        Reactions with non-metals
            The halogens react with non-metals such as hydrogen. 
            When a halogen reacts with hydrogen, the product is a compound called a hydrogen halide. For example, chlorine reacts with hydrogen:
                hydrogen + chlorine → hydrogen chloride
                H2(g) + Cl2(g) → 2HCl(g)

            The hydrogen halides are gases at room temperature. They dissolve in water to produce acidic solutions. 
            Hydrogen chloride dissolves in water to produce hydrochloric acid, HCl(aq).

    Group 7 - displacement reactions
        A more reactive halogen can displace a less reactive halogen from solutions of its salts. 
        For example, chlorine is more reactive than iodine. A solution of chlorine can displace iodine from potassium iodide solution:
        chlorine + potassium iodide → potassium chloride + iodine
        Cl2(aq) + 2KI(aq) → 2KCl(aq) + I2(aq)