Transition metals

Physical properties of transition elements
    Most metals are transition metals. They include iron, copper and chromium. The transition elements are in the central part of the periodic table.
    transition element : A metal that is located in between groups 2 and 3 of the periodic table and has coloured compounds.
    Physical properties
        The transition elements share some physical properties with all metals:
        they conduct electricity in the solid and liquid statesthey are shiny when freshly cut

    Some properties of transition elements are different from those of the metals in group 1. Compared to other metals, most transition metals have:
        higher melting points
        higher densities
        greater strength
        greater hardness

    Remember that these are typical properties – some transition metals may not show one or more of them. For example, mercury melts at just -39°C, so it is a liquid at room temperature.

Typical transition elements
    The elements below have properties that are typical of transition elements:
        chromium, Cr
        manganese, Mn
        iron, Fe
        cobalt, Co
        nickel, Ni
        copper, Cu
Chemical properties of transition elements

Reactions with oxygen
    The group 1 elements react quickly with oxygen in the air at room temperature. Most transition elements react slowly, or not at all, with oxygen at room temperature. Some transition metals react with oxygen on heating, for example:
        copper + oxygen → copper oxide
        2Cu(s) + O2(g) → 2CuO(s)

Reactions with water
    The group 1 elements react vigorously with cold water. Most transition elements react slowly with cold water, or not at all.
        Iron reacts with water and oxygen at room temperature to form hydrated iron(III) oxide, or rust.
Reactions with halogens
    The group 1 elements react vigorously with the halogens. Some transition elements also react with halogens, for example:
        iron + chlorine → iron(III) chloride
        Fe(s) + Cl2(g) → FeCl3(s)

Ions with different charges
    Transition elements form ions with different charges. For example:
    manganese forms Mn2+ and Mn3+ ions copper forms Cu+ and Cu2+ ions

Coloured compounds
    Metals that are not transition elements usually form white compounds. Transition elements form coloured compounds.

    The table shows the colours of some iron compounds.
        Compound	                    Colour
        Iron(II) hydroxide, Fe(OH)2	    Pale green
        Iron(III) hydroxide, Fe(OH)3	Orange-brown
        Iron(III) oxide, Fe2O3	        Red-brown

Catalytic activity
    Catalysts are substances that increase the rate of reaction without being used up in the reaction. For example:
        iron is the catalyst in the Haber process, which makes ammonia
        manganese(IV) oxide increases the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide to oxygen and water