3.Monoclonal antibodies - Higher

    Monoclonal antibodies are identical copies of one type of antibody.

    Antibodies are proteins produced by a type of white blood called lymphocytes. Pathogens have proteins on their surface called antigens. When a pathogen infects the body, the lymphocytes recognise these antigens as foreign and attack them by producing antibodies.

    Antibodies bind to specific antigens on pathogens. This means that only one type of antibody will bind to a matching antigen.
    Scientists discovered that we could make antibodies to bind to antigens on other substances, and not just those on pathogens.
    Once bound, the antigens - and the substances they are found on - are merged tightly together. This makes them easier to identify and deal with.
    
    Formation of monoclonal antibodies
        An antigen is injected into a mouse
        The mouse naturally produces lymphocytes, which produce antibodies specific to the antigen
        Spleen cells which produce the lymphocytes are removed during a small operation
        The spleen cells are fused with human cancerous white blood cells called myeloma cells to form hybridoma cells which divide indefinitely
        These hybridoma cells divide and produce millions of monoclonal antibodies specific to the original antigen

    Pregnancy test kits
        Pregnancy test kits use monoclonal antibodies. These have been designed to bind with a hormone called HCG which is found only in the urine of pregnant women. Monoclonal antibodies are attached to the end of a pregnancy test stick onto which a woman urinates.

    Cancer diagnosis and treatment

        Cancerous cells have antigens. Monoclonal antibodies can be designed to bind specifically with these antigens. When injected into a person's body, the monoclonal antibodies will bind with these cancer cells andclump them together. This makes it easier to identify a cancerous tumour, which can then be treated or removed.

Benefits, limits & ethical issues of monoclonal antibodies

Benefits

Monoclonal antibodies
 can be designed to bind to, and identify, almost any substance. They can be used for many purposes:

testing for pregnancy by detecting HCG hormones in urine
testing for diseases such herpes and chlamydia, and HIV which can lead to the development of AIDS
to treat conditions like cancer by carrying drugs directly to the tumour cells, and helping the immune system attack them
monoclonal antibodies can be produced quickly despite the fact that it can be time consuming when they are made for the first time

    Limitations
        The human body is very complicated. Scientists originally thought that monoclonal antibodies would be a 'magic bullet' and would be able to identify and treat many medical conditions. 
        Tests have revealed, however, that this is not the case. 
        The interactions in the human body has resulted in unwanted side effects. This means they are not as widely used by doctors as originally thought.
    Monoclonal antibodies are also very expensive to produce.

    Ethical issues
        An ethical issue is one in which people disagree for religious or other moral reasons. The first step in making a monoclonal antibody is to inject a mouse with an antigen. After it has produced antibodies, a small operation removes spleen cells, which then continue make the antibodies. Some people disagree with this use of animals to produce monoclonal antibodies