Energy demands

    National and global energy demands and resources
        Energy needs
        Nearly everything requires energy and a way to use energy is by transferring it from one energy store to another.

        Systems that can store large amounts of energy are called energy resources. 
        The major energy resources available to produce electricity are 
        fossil fuels, 
        nuclear fuel, 
        bio-fuel, 
        wind,
        hydroelectricity, 
        geothermal, 
        tidal, 
        water waves and 
        the Sun. 
        Ultimately, all the energy on Earth originally comes from the Sun but has been stored as different energy resources.

        Energy is needed in: home, public services, transports, factories and farms

        Releasing energy from some stores causes pollution and harmful waste products. 
        Burning fossil fuels releases carbon dioxide, adding to the greenhouse effect, and sulphur dioxide which causes acid rain.

Where does energy come from?
    There are different energy resources in the world and the amount of energy stored by them varies greatly. For example, the nuclear energy within 1 kg of uranium contains a very large amount of energy, but the gravitational potential energy stored by many thousands of tonnes of water held back by a dam contains less.

    A renewable energy resource is one that is being (or can be) replenished as it is used.

    Renewable resources are replenished either by:
        human action, eg trees cut down for bio-fuel are replaced by planting new trees
        natural processes, eg water let through a dam for 
        hydroelectricity is replaced through the water cycle
        A non-renewable energy resource is one with a finite amount. It will eventually run out when all reserves have been used up.

    The fuel for nuclear power stations is relatively cheap, but the power stations themselves are expensive to build. It is also very expensive to dismantle, or decommission, old nuclear power stations at the end of their useful life and the highly radioactive waste needs to be stored for millions of years before the natural activity will reduce to a safe level.