#Referring to the table of conductivities above, why is it better to have a window made of two layers of glass with a layer of air trapped between them?




--- Questions & Answers

Referring to the table of conductivities above, why is it better to have a window made of two layers of glass with a layer of air trapped between them?
    Both glass and air are insulators because they have low thermal conductivities. The layer of air has the lowest thermal conductivity and reduces the overall conductivity of the window unit. Since air and glass are both transparent people can still see through the window.


Multiple choice questions
    It is important that scientists develop new energy resources. Choose one reason why. Most energy resources have negative environmental consequences

    An island has a large number of wind turbines and a coal-fired power station. The island needs to use the electricity generated by the coal-fired power station at certain times. Choose one reason why.

    Wind turbines only generate electricity when it's sufficiently windy. Reliable energy resources such as coal-fired power stations are required to generate electricity when the output from wind turbines is low.

    What name is given to the total kinetic energy and potential energy of all the particles of helium gas in a helium balloon?

    Particles vibrate, and have kinetic energy. There is also potential energy stored in the bonds between them. These two energy stores combined are known as internal energy.

One and two mark questions
    Coal is a non-renewable energy resource. Name two other non-renewable energy resources. nuclear, oil, gas

    A wind turbine has an average power output of 0.60 MW. A coal-fired power station has a continuous power output of 1,500 MW. Calculate how many wind turbines would be needed to generate the same power output as one coal-fired power station.

    Write down the equation which links gravitational field strength, gravitational potential energy, height and mass : Ep = mgh

    The National Grid ensures that fossil fuel power stations in the UK only produce about 33% of the total electricity they could produce when operating at a maximum output. Suggest two reasons why.

        conserves fuel reserves
        spare capacity to compensate for unreliable renewable resources
        provides spare capacity in case of power station emergency shutdown
        to not make unnecessary environmental impact (pollution etc)

Three and four mark questions

    A car has a mass of 1,650 kg. This table shows the kinetic energy of the car moving at 11 m/s. Find out the kinetic energy of the when it moves at 30 m/sec.

Maths questions
    The mass of water in a cup is 200 g. Calculate the energy, in joules, transferred from the water in a cup when the temperature of the water falls by 8°C. Specific heat capacity of water = 4,200 J / kg°C


Practical questions

A student investigated the specific heat capacity of metals.

Six mark questions
    Describe an experiment the student could do to measure the specific heat capacity of a metal.

    A farmer plans to generate all the electricity needed on her farm, using either a biogas generator or a small wind turbine.

    Biogas	renewable, energy resource is free, reliable energy source, does not depend on the weather, uses up (animal) waste products, concentrated energy source, cheaper (to buy and install), shorter pay-back time (than wind), no transport cost for fuels	
    
    adds carbon dioxide to the atmosphere, contributes to the greenhouse effect, contributes to global warming

    Wind	renewable, energy resource is free, does not produce any carbon dioxide	
    not reliable, depends on the weather/wind, there will be times when not enough electricity is generated for the farm's needs, dilute energy source longer pay-back time (than biogas), more expensive (to buy and install)