1.The periodic table - AQA - Mendeleev's periodic table

Before discovering protons, neutrons and electrons, scientists tried to classify the elements by arranging them in order of their atomic weights. The atomic weight of an element is equivalent to what we now call its relative atomic mass.

Dmitri Mendeleev was a Russian chemist. He wrote chemistry books and was looking for ways to organise the known elements. He published his first periodic table of the elements in 1869.
In it, he arranged the elements in order of increasing atomic weights. He also took into account the
properties of the elements and their compounds. This meant that his table:

had gaps in it
showed elements with similar chemical properties lined up in groups

However, from their atomic weights, some pairs of elements next to each other were in the wrong order.

Predictions using gaps
Mendeleev left gaps in his table for elements not known at the time. By looking at the properties of the elements next to a gap, he could also predict the properties of these undiscovered elements

Pair reversals
Iodine has a lower atomic weight than tellurium. So iodine should be placed before tellurium in Mendeleev's periodic table. However, iodine has similar chemical properties to chlorine and bromine. To make iodine line up with chlorine and bromine in his table, Mendeleev swapped the positions of iodine and tellurium.

The modern periodic table
In the modern periodic table:

elements are arranged in rows, called periods, in order of increasing atomic number
elements with similar properties are placed in vertical columns, called groups

The table is called the periodic table because elements with similar properties occur at regular intervals.
The atomic number of tellurium is 52, and the atomic number of iodine is 53.
iodine has one naturally occurring isotope, iodine-127 and the most abundant  tellurium isotopes are tellurium-128 and tellurium-130

so these elements are in the correct order in the modern periodic table as it's based on atomic number

Electronic structure
An electronic structure is the way in which electrons are arranged in an atom.
Electrons in atoms occupy energy levels, also called electron shells, outside the nucleus
Shells has a maximum numbers of electrons they can hold.
The electrons in an atom occupy the lowest available energy level first.
This is the shell nearest the nucleus.
When this shell is full the electrons begin to occupy the next energy level.
For first 20 emelents first three shells can hold: 2, 8, 8

Number of shells	                      = Period number
Number of electrons in outermost shell    =	Group number
Total number of electrons in all shells	  = Atomic number

Properties of metals and non-metals

Most elements are metals. In their chemical reactions, metal atoms lose electrons to form positive ions. For example:

when magnesium burns in air, each atom loses two electrons to form a Mg2+ ion
when sodium reacts with chlorine, each sodium atom loses one electron to form a Na+ ion

Properties of a typical metal (when solid)	Properties of a typical non-metal (when solid)
Good conductor of electricity	            Poor conductor of electricity
Good conductor of heat	                    Poor conductor of heat
Shiny	                                    Dull
High density	                            Low density
Malleable	                                Brittle
Ductile	                                    Brittle

