4.Non-communicable diseases
Health is the state of physical and mental well-being. Factors work together and affect physical and mental health. A disease is a disorder that affects an organism's body, organs, tissues or cells.

    Different types of disease
        communicable, which can be transferred from one person to another, or from one organism to another, eg in humans, these include measles, food poisoning and malaria
        non-communicable, which are not transferred between people or other organisms. Cancer, diabetes, heart desease, neurological disorder, genetic disease and conditions

        Other factors that can have major effects on physical and mental health include:
        diet , life style(How people choose to live.) stress(The body's response to mental or emotional pressure.)

    Different types of disease may interact.
        Defects in the immune system mean that an individual is more likely to suffer from infectious diseases.
        Viruses living in cells can be the trigger for cancers. For instance, the majority of cases of cancer of the cervix are linked with a virus present in the female reproductive system.
        The reaction of the immune system to pathogens and other foreign bodies can trigger allergic reactions that lead to skin rashes and asthma. 
    Cancer and carcinogens
    Cancer
    Cells grow then divide by mitosis only when we need new ones – when we’re growing or need to replace old or damaged cells.
    When a cell becomes cancerous, it begins to grow and divide uncontrollably. New cells are produced – even if the body does not need them.
    A group of cancerous cells produces a growth called a tumour.

    There are two types of tumour - benign and malignant. 
    Benign	Grows slowly; usually grow within a membrane, so can easily be removed; does not invade other parts of the body
    Malignant	Grows quickly; invades neighbouring tissues and can spread to other parts of the body in the bloodstream; as the tumour grows, cancer cells detach and can form secondary tumours in other parts of the body - this is called metastasis.

    At some point, secondary tumours may develop.
        Tumor secrets chemicals
        The chemicals stimulates blood vessels to grow around the tumor
        cancer cells detach from the tumor and are transported in the blood
        A malignant cell squeezez through the blood capilary wall
        The cell devide and secondary tumor start to grow

    What causes cancer?
        There are genetic factors that increase the likelihood of developing some cancers.
        Chemicals and other agents that can cause cancer are called carcinogens
        Carcinogens cause cancer by damaging DNA
        Carcinogens cause mutations to occur. A single mutation will not cause cancer – several are required. For this reason, we are more likely to develop cancer as we get older.

    There are several risk factors for various types of cancers including:

        Lifestyle factors:viruses linked with cancer, such as the human papilloma virus (HPV), being spread from person to person through sexual intercourse
        the chemical carcinogens in cigarette smoke increasing the risk of lung cancer
        alcohol intake is linked with certain cancers
        exposure to ultraviolet radiation, part of which is ionising, during sunbathing or outdoor activities, leading to the development of skin cancers
        diet, including fat and salt intake, increases the risk of cancer

        Industrial and environmental factors at work:
        exposure to ionising radiation increases the risk factor
        exposure to chemical carcinogens
        There are also genetic risk factors for some cancers.
    Risk factors and causal mechanisms
    Scientists look for patterns in data.
        Research has established links between cancer and various lifestyle factors, chemicals produced in the body, or that enter the human body, and chemicals in the environment.

        Scientists have established several causal mechanisms for risk factors.

        Correlation and cause
        If there is a correlation between a particular factor and an outcome, it does not mean that the factor necessarily causes the outcome. Scientists must look for a possible mechanism by which the factor could be the likely cause.
    Smoking and cardiovascular disease
        Smoking damages the lining of the arteries, including the coronary arteries. The damage encourages the build-up of fatty material in the arteries. This can lead to a heart attack or a stroke.
        Inhalation of carbon monoxide in cigarette smoke reduces the amount of oxygen that can be carried by the blood.
        The nicotine in cigarette smoke increases the heart rate, putting strain on the heart.
        Chemicals in cigarette smoke increase the likelihood of the blood clotting, resulting in a heart attack or stroke.

    A person may develop COPD – chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. This condition includes the diseases chronic bronchitis and emphysema. In COPD:
        smoking damages the bronchioles and can eventually destroy many of the alveoli in the lungs
        the airways become inflamed and mucus, which normally traps particles in the lungs, builds up
        the patient becomes breathless, and finds it more and more difficult to obtain the oxygen required for respiration
    Lung cancer
        The carcinogens in cigarette smoke also cause lung cancer. Almost all cases of lung cancer are caused by smoking – smaller numbers of cases are linked with air pollution and ionising radiation from radon gas, a radioactive element found in the environment in some parts of the country.

    Effects of smoking on babies
        For mothers who smoke during pregnancy:

        smoking increases the risk of miscarriage
        the babies and children are more likely to suffer from respiratory infections and an increased risk of asthma
        the long-term physical growth and intellectual development of the baby/child is affected
        there is an increased risk of birth defects
        the birthweight of the baby is reduced

    Effects of alcohol on liver and brain function and unborn babies
    Drinking excess alcohol can damage the liver, the organ responsible for processing and breaking down alcohol.
        the patient begins by feeling sick, experiences weight loss, loss of appetite, there is a yellowing of the eyes, confusion, drowsiness and vomiting blood
        alcohol causes lipids to build up in the liver - fatty liver disease
        alcohol damage leads to alcoholic hepatitis(Inflammation or swelling of the liver, for example because of infection by a virus or drinking too much alcohol.), which can lead to death
        cirrhosis(Scarring of the liver, which can be caused by alcoholism or hepatitis.) of the liver can develop – the liver becomes scarred and loses its ability to function
        changes are now irreversible and the reduced ability to process alcohol can also lead to brain damage

        Alcohol affects the brain in several ways, it:
            slows reaction time
            causes difficulty walking
            can impair memory
            causes slurred speech
            causes changes in sleep patterns and mood, including increased anxiety and depression

        Longer term drinking of excess alcohol:
            causes brain shrinkage
            leads to memory problems
            leads to psychiatric problems
            may result in the patient requiring long-term care

        Alcohol can lead to a variety of physical, developmental and behavioural effects on the fetus.
            is smaller in size
            has a smaller brain with fewer neurones
            will have long-term learning and behavioural difficulties
            has distinct facial features

    Effect of lifestyle factors on exercise, nutrition and obesity
        Obesity leads to high blood pressure and the build-up of fatty deposits in the arteries, which lead to cardiovascular disease. It also increases the likelihood of developing diabetes, another risk factor cardiovascular disease.

    Type 2 diabetes is where the body's cells lose their sensitivity to insulin - they no longer respond, or respond less effectively, to the insulin that's produced.

    Obesity accounts for 80 to 85% of the risk of type 2 diabetes. Rising obesity is linked with 'western diet' - a diet that includes energy-rich 'fast foods' and an inactive lifestyle.

    There is no cure for type 2 diabetes, but it may be possible to control it by diet and exercise.

    The principles of sampling

        Epidemiology is the study of the distribution and patterns of health and disease, in and across populations.
        Scientists study the incidence of disease, using medical records, and use medical research to investigate causes of disease.
        When investigating health and disease, and risk factors are involved, scientists can't study every person on the planet. Scientists must study samples

.   To obtain a representative sample:
        the study must be wide, and cover all groups in the population being studied
        the study must be random within these groups

    Line graphs
        Line graphs display data where both variables are continuous.

    Scatter graphs, or scatter diagrams, look at a possible correlation between two variables. Large amounts of data are usually recorded to investigate trends, and scatter graphs are particularly useful for analysing this kind of data.